# Homework 6: Reflecton

- Due on Saturday, September 21 at 11:59pm
- Weight: 8% of total grade

<br>

**Write**: Reflect on your previous work and how you would adjust to include ethics and inequity components. Total length should be a few paragraphs, no more than one page.

I have been working in Healthcare IT domain - Interoperability. Interoperability in its most concise explanation is the ability of systems to exchange information and then use the information exchanged effectively. The data exchanged between two system has be secured and protected. The most important factor which is always on top list is security and privacy of the patient data while working on any feature development not only by the product team but also by the development and the team implementing the solution for a given Health information exchange (HIE) system. Interoperability and data privacy are two concepts that have significant importance in the digital world and cannot be overlooked. 

As a full interoperability product, we do have registry where in we provide capability to HIE to store patient records and images. This data is highly sesitive. For development and testing purposes we are not allowed to use real patient data and we create our own sample data with images to cover most of our use cases. This increases the overall feature development time.There are at times cases where we can't generate our own data , in such cases we request our partnering HIE to give us the access to their test enviorment where we can do feature testing following all the legal guidelines. For example, if the feature is built for US HIE, this sometimes requires the testing to be done only from US land and with madatory HIPPA logging etc.  

Ethics and inequity components are really important and these should be foundation of any company belief system but there are companies who have hunger for profit and money and they put aside ethics on corner to any extent. One
Intriguing example of a company accused of sharing and selling patient information, fraudulently or through deals with pharmaceutical companies, is 23andMe, a popular personal genomics and biotechnology company . Companies such as 23andMe have made the discovery of an individual’s ancestry as easy as swabbing one’s cheek or spitting in a cup. In addition to aiding in personal discovery, the company provides consumers the choice to opt for research conducted on behalf of academic and nonprofit organizations. It is no secret that DNA testing companies such as 23andMe and Ancestry share anonymized consumer genetic information with pharmaceutical giants , and university and research institutions as part of million-dollar deals, resulting in a further reduction in patient awareness and control of their own data utilization. A main reason why consumers may choose to participate in research opportunities and discovery is simply consumer altruism toward improving health care and scientific knowledge. One may believe that if their DNA could help find the cause of, or a cure for, a disease, it would be worthwhile to contribute their genetic information. However, when a drug company actually brings a drug to market based, in part, on one’s DNA, the general population will not be afforded a cheaper medication despite their altruistic efforts. Thus, in addition to the possibility of inappropriate distribution and commercial use of secure patient data, the fact that patients receive no financial compensation for the use of their own data provides a depth of complexity to the sharing and utilization of electronic health information. Simply put, patient privacy concerns may conflict with the advancement of knowledge through data sharing.

